The people I'm talking to in Cuba are
suffering terribly right now. Blackouts
20, 22 hours a day. A country can't
survive like that. People can't survive
[music] like that. Ada Ferrer Pulitzer
prize-winning historian of Cuba and
America. It feels like a heavy weight to
carry. My coming here meant that I had
opportunities I would have never had had
I stayed in Cuba. At the heart of the
book is a profound sense of guilt,
right? that [music] my mother brought me
with her to this country. She left
behind my brother. He had trauma. I had
a loving mother. From Bloomberg Weekend,
this is the Michelle Hussein show.
We're not even halfway through the year
and it has been such a dramatic one in
world affairs, Venezuela, Iran, Lebanon
that I wouldn't blame you if the extent
of Cuba's crisis hadn't fully
registered. But the island really is in
deep crisis. Oil that used to come in
from Venezuela stopped in January after
the US removed its leader. And then oil
that used to come from Mexico stopped
because its government didn't want to
incur President Trump's wroth. And the
effect of this is that in Cuba, people
today are desperate. Like many
Cubanameans, the historian Ada Ferrer is
worried about family and friends there.
But for her, the current pressure from
Washington is part of a long history
between Cuba and the United States. one
that has shaped her own family, as she
reveals in a new book called Keeper of
My Kin. So, this conversation is in part
personal, but also political. Marco
Rubio, another Cubanamean, comes up. And
when you turn to the written version of
this at bloomberg.com/michelle,
as I hope you do, you'll see all of that
wider history reflected in my notes.
Whether it's the Bay of Pigs, the
Marielle boat lift, alligator Alcatraz,
or Cuba and American politics, it's all
there. And here's what happened when Ada
Ferrer dialed in from the Princeton
University studio.
Essentially, Keeper of My Kin was my
introduction to your earlier book. And I
think it's this really unusual
combination of it being incredibly
timely with everything that's happened
this year, but also kind of timeless,
which is, I think, an immense
achievement. You know, there's a part of
me that knew that I would always have to
write this book, that it was part of my
story, part of my family story, part of
Cuba's story, part of an American story.
I didn't know when I started writing it
that as I wrote it would become more
relevant because of basically US
immigration policy and what's happening
with deportations of Cubans. And then by
the time I had finished the book and it
was in production then there's a whole
new kind of timeliness with what's been
happening in Cuba since the attack on
Venezuela.
>> Yeah. I think the stage is set for your
next book really and I do want to bring
us right up to the present day. But I'd
love you to start by helping us
understand your relationship with Cuba
and I think you've hinted at it already
there. There's a line in Keeper of My
Kin where you write that Cuba is the
place that you were taught by your
family to both love and hate.
>> Right.
>> Can you deconstruct that for us?
>> Yeah. Well, I was born in Cuba, so
that's the that's the beginning of the
relationship, but I left when I was 10
months or I was taken when I was 10
months, which means that I had no memory
of it at all. So, my introduction to
Cuba was via other people, via my mostly
my parents, but also neighbors and
community. And in that community and in
my family, there was an intense love for
the place, an intense nostalgia about
the place. For a long time, an intense
desire to return. At the same time,
there was profound disagreement with the
government of Cuba. So that made it that
made it a complicated place. You know,
you could love the place but not the
government, the people but not the
leaders. So that was part of it. The
other thing is that, you know, like any
American teenager, when your parents
keep talking about something and keep
trying to get you to to like it and
value it, there's a part of you that
always resists, right? So, whenever they
compared the US to Cuba and, oh,
everything was so much better in Cuba or
in Cuba, we didn't do that. In Cuba, you
would have never been able to do that.
All my sister and I could say was,
"You're not in Cuba anymore." Right? So,
there was, as a good American teenager,
I kind of learned to be a little
skeptical of everything my parents said.
But also it's kind of extraordinary that
they're saying that to you because in no
way do they want to live in the Cuba of
Castro. They've made a very distinct
choice to leave it behind.
>> Exactly. So I think you know their
assumption as with many people who left
early on and it was a plausible
assumption in that time and place right
the height of the cold war the US 90
miles away as it continues to be now.
their assumption and also the US with a
history of a long long history of
intervention in Cuba. They really
assumed that the Castro government
wouldn't last. There had been the Bay of
Pigs in 1961
in which you know the US invaded Cuba
using Cuban exiles and the US was
defeated. But even then, people really
thought that there would probably be
another invasion, that a next invasion
would not be as badly organized as that
one. Or they just or they thought Fidel
would fall of his own accord. So their
assumption was that they would return.
When my father left in 1962, my mother
was pregnant with me. So he left a year
before we did. And he really thought it
would be a matter of months, maybe a
year. And then my mother thought the
same thing when we left. So this journey
that defines your life really leaving as
a babe in your mother's arms age 10
months in 1963
I guess you know that story because your
mother told it to you right so
>> how was it described to you as a child
and how did you fill in the blanks later
on? Well, my mother was always a
storyteller. She loved telling stories
and she even loved, you know, adding
music to her stories and snatches of
songs and and so on. So, the story she
told was a story of the two of us making
this incredible irreversible, it turns
out, journey together. And we were
partners. She suffered. She struggled.
She'd never left the country. She was
wearing heels. Yeah. I was heavy in her
arms. She didn't know what she was
doing. The people who were going to pick
us up weren't there. It was just one one
mishap and hardship after another. But I
was always there and I was good and I
behaved. And we got here and eventually
we got to my father in New York on July
4th of all dates, 1963.
And she always said, "You recognized
him. You threw your arms to him to be
held by him even though you hadn't met
him yet." She always repeated that part.
So it was a beautiful story in a way of
where she struggled, she was scared, my
presence helped her and we and we
survived and we made it. But when she
told that kind of ritualized story, she
left something out and that was that we
had left my brother behind. She left
behind a 9 and 1/2year-old son who was
her son from a first marriage. And my
brother Boli, my halfb brotherther, his
father did not let him leave, would not
give my mother permission to take him.
And so when she told the the beautiful
ritualized story of the two of us
against the world, she left that part
out. You know, even then it made no
sense because I always knew my brother
was in Cuba. I always knew he was there.
I always knew the goal was reunification
as soon as possible. We talked about him
all the time. His picture was in the
house. I used to kiss his picture at
night, you know, that kind of thing. So
that part of the story
was was hugely important, but not not
treated quite the same way as the other
part of the story. And then as I got
older, even as a teenager, starting to
resist kind of the imposition of their
Cuban nostalgia, I just started to
become more more interested.
And in 1977,
uh, the four of us, my parents, my
sister and I were sitting in the living
room watching Barbara Walters interview
Fidel Castro. And before he came on,
there were scenes of Havana, you know,
of the Malikon and the lighthouse and
the streets and the cars and so on. And
I looked at it and just started crying.
And I would have been 15 at the time.
And my parents just couldn't believe it.
You know, the the nostalgia and the pain
had always been theirs. you know why was
I crying and I remember so clearly
saying to them I'm crying because I was
born there but I can't remember it and I
think in a way that started something
that feeling started something for me
and I became more interested in
understanding it in and in understanding
it in my own terms as well not just as a
place for their nostalgia.
>> Your brother Polly is right there on the
cover of your book. It's the three of
you in a picture that's taken just
before you leave Cuba or on his
birthday, I think a few months before
you leave Cuba with your mother. I think
the key bit of detail that you
discovered years later was that he
didn't know that you and your mother
were leaving for the United States. That
he was out playing with his friends and
he came back and he was told you were
just gone for a while. So when we left,
my [clears throat] mother didn't say
goodbye. He didn't know that we were
leaving. And I blocked out when exactly
I learned that. But I believe it was
either in high school or in college or
maybe even after college when I first
went back to Cuba in 1990 and met my my
aunt who was one of the ones who raised
him. But yeah, my mother in consultation
with her own mother and in consultation
with her sisters decided that it would
be easier on everyone involved for us to
leave without her saying goodbye.
And it
when I learned that it it shocked me. It
it hurt me. It crushed me a little bit.
But I think you know it was a different
moment. They didn't think about
psychology maybe in the same way we
think about it today. They didn't think
about trauma in the same way we think
about it today. And above all, they
thought it would be temporary. So they
thought the effect of it could be
reversed quickly, but it wasn't for a
long time. So yes, he was outside
playing with friends and we left and
then he came back for dinner and my my
grandmother told him that we had gone to
the countryside to help with an ailing
relative. And I know that he learned
before the week was out that we had left
because he sat down and wrote a letter
to my mother about 5 days after we left.
>> Yeah. May the 4th, 1963 is I think the
date on that letter. And you have the
letters in your book. And it's I mean
they are [sighs and gasps] they are
heartbreaking. worse almost as the years
go on, as he grows up, because I think
it's 16 years until he sees your mother
again, but he doesn't get to the US
until he is 26.
>> That's right. First of all, let me just
say that I didn't know those letters
existed. I found them after both my
parents had died when I was cleaning out
their apartment. and they begin as as
you said May 4th, 1963
and they go through 1979. So they're a
chronicle of his life without us, but
they're excruciating to read. Um you see
him over the years becoming more and
more traumatized as a young man,
struggling with staying in school,
struggling with keeping a job. And then
my mother visits him in 1979 when Fidel
Castro decides that Cubans who left can
come back and visit family. And so my
mother went back to see him. By then her
own mother had already died. And so that
was that was 1979. And then the
following year, 1980, you get a major
historical event, something called the
Mariel boat lift, in which 125,000
Cubans leave by sea in the space of a
few months. And my brother left. My
mother actually went to get him. She
took a bus down to Florida and we were
living in New Jersey and she rented out
a space on on a little boat and paid the
captain to take her to Mariel. I was
about to turn 18 and about to leave for
college at the end of that summer.
>> Yeah. And I know he didn't have an easy
life in the US. And I should say that he
has passed away as have both of your
parents. And I guess that's part of what
allows you to write a book as personal
as this.
>> Right.
>> Because I was so struck by the letters.
I'm just going to read a few lines out
because I think that
>> for anyone yet to read your book, they
give an idea of the depth of the
heartache and what it means to be
separated as a child. So early on that
first letter he says I want to speak
with my father so he can give me
permission to go with you but he's
telling your mother that he's being a
good boy and then he says how much he
wants to go to New York and then by the
time he's 1920 he's saying my heart
neither measures nor marks time and
later he writes you have to understand
that my life is full of the great trauma
I've suffered. It's a life spent waiting
in many ways, right? Waiting to arrive
in the US,
>> like waiting for that country as much as
it is to be reunited
>> with your mother, I imagine.
>> Yeah, I think that that that's such a
great way to put it. And the thing is,
you know, you can't really live a life
waiting. So
things didn't matter in the present for
him because it would all be erased, you
know, by his reunification with my
mother. Hence, work, relationships, all
these things are not are not worth doing
in Cuba.
>> Yeah, they don't count because my real
life will begin when I'm with my mother
in the US. And yeah, so it's it's a
terrible terrible story. Ada, tell us
how it fits into the wider story of
Cubanameans and perhaps even Cuba and
the United States because I mean you're
you're writing from your own personal
experience in your families, but would
there be many stories of this kind of
separation within families of this of
this longing to get to the US of this
complicated relationship?
>> Oh, absolutely. I think that the
question of migration to the US is
central to the history of Cuba. It was
in some sense in the 19th century, but
especially since 1959,
you had multiple waves of migration.
Early on, you had a group of people that
history has termed the golden exiles.
They tended to be more elite. They
tended to think of themselves as exiles
who would return and so on. Then later
you had something called the freedom
flights which lasted from you know mid1
1960s to early 1970s. You had 300,000
people leave. Then you had the Mariel
boat lift 125,000 people leave. You had
the 94 rafter crisis in which about
35,000 people leave. So there's been
multiple multiple waves of migration.
And if anything that's accelerated since
the 1990s. So, it's a major part of the
story of of Miami certainly and of
Florida, but I think it's also a major
part of Cuba. You know, the the the idea
that one could leave or the idea that a
family member would leave or a friend or
a neighbor, it just became part of the
texture of daily life. I remember
finding in an archive once someone
writing a letter to a friend in the US
saying, "I'm just tired. I can't get
anything done because my day is
constantly interrupted by people coming
to say goodbye because they're leaving.
Right? So that becomes a part of the
story of the Cuban revolution itself.
Right? The possibility of leaving, the
possibility of being left. And right
now, if we can bring it to the present,
over the last 5 to 10 years, Cuba has
lost about um about 20% of its
population. It's a massive exodus, the
biggest one in Cuban history. There's
always pain and heartache there, right?
It's not easy leaving family behind
>> and then they try to help as much as
they can, which is why remittances are
one of the major sources of income in
Cuba, right? So people people survive on
that.
>> And is this part of your life still that
you worry about family who remain in
Cuba and people like you try and figure
out ways to still support them?
>> Oh, absolutely. There's no question
about that. You know, my mother died in
2020, but she was always thinking about
what would happen when she died. In
2014, she wrote a letter that she hoped
my sister and I would find after she
died. And in that letter, she reminded
me, "Be sure to send money to Dianinia.
Send her this much money and she will
divide it up in this way among these
three people. You can send it by calling
this man in Hyia and he will charge you
this much." So she left specific
instructions on when what months of the
year to do it. By the time my mother
died, my aunt in Cuba who I was supposed
to send the money to had already died.
So it was kind of a moot point. But even
the fact that she told me that, it
stayed with me always. So I'm always I'm
always calling relatives in Cuba or
calling them through other relatives
here. And yeah, trying to help in any
way I can. And sometimes that means
traveling to Cuba and taking things they
need. Sometimes that means helping them
get medicine through pharmacies in Miami
that send medicine to Cuba or even
through connections in the in other
places. Anyway, there people do all
kinds of things to help their relatives
in Cuba. It feels like a heavy weight to
carry. Obviously, what those in Cuba are
going through that's the most immense,
but for you too to feel that contrast
between their lives and yours. Yeah, I
think that's a lot of it. You know, at
the heart of the book is a profound
sense of guilt, right? That my mother
brought me with her to this country. She
left behind my brother. He had trauma. I
had a loving mother. I had opportunities
here that he never had there. Even when
I became a historian of Cuba and began
traveling to Cuba, I could do that. I
could get the visas. I could get the
paperwork necessary. I could stay in
places in Havana where I had easy access
to food because I had dollars, etc.,
etc. Meanwhile, he came to the US and
ran into all kinds of trouble.
Eventually became undocumented after the
fact. He could never return to Cuba. So
even in that, I had privileges that he
didn't. So all along there's this guilt
that what I had that he didn't have. But
then it's a guilt that transfers in a
sense to to more than just my brother,
right? to the place in general, to my
family in general. So, yes, I talk to
them. I talk to relatives regularly. I
think about them all the time.
>> Do you wake up to messages from them? Is
that how your day begins?
>> I don't wake up to messages every day,
but I often and sometimes it's multiple
messages from different people. So, I'll
have a cousin who's in the hospital and
needs help and his daughter's trying to
get the medicine from the Dominican
Republic. Meanwhile, a relative who is
about to leave Cuba for Spain because
people continue leaving and those it's
much harder obviously to come to the US
now, but there are people who have
access to uh to Spain by other means.
So, a message from him about something
going on, a message from another
relative whose nephew is an alligator
Alcatraz here in the US. I mean, it's
just it's it not every day and I don't
begrudge any of them, right? It's what
they do and I'm here. Part of me thinks
that I'm continuing kind of a legacy of
my mother. She always had that role. She
was working poor and then retired poor
in Miami Beach, but still with her tiny
pension, she sent like $150 every 3
months, which is nothing really, but
it's what she could do. So, I think of
it partly as continuing her legacy and
just doing doing what I can. So then to
the present moment Ada and the situation
since January when the oil that used to
come from Venezuela no longer came after
Maduro was captured amidst all of this.
There is a process of negotiation that's
underway with the US. What do you think
is going on?
>> You know I wish I could say where it was
heading and I wish I could say it was
heading somewhere positive.
I'm not able to do that. With Donald
Trump in charge of US policy in Cuba,
it's hard to predict anything, right?
Because he can say something one day and
then change his mind a week later. So,
there's that level of uncertainty. But
also, here's what I can say. The people
I'm talking to in Cuba are suffering
terribly
right now. Even the Cuban government
announced that they were completely out
of oil. that blackouts even in Havana
where they tend to be less severe than
in the countryside or in the in the
interior the blackouts are going to be
of 20 22 hours a day right a country
can't survive like that people can't
survive like that so my sense is that
something has to change
but the way I see it both sides are just
stuck in these old scripts they've had
for a long time Cuba basically says no
negotiation even though they have to be
negotiating and we know that because
John Rackcliffe was just there, right?
Then meanwhile, Trump speaks in a way
that that doubles down on a kind of
really crude American imperialism that's
reminiscent of the turn of the 20th
century. And what gets lost in all that
is that people just want to live,
right? And I don't have any confidence
right now that that is the priority of
either side involved in the
negotiations.
>> Do you think that Cuba is a threat to
the national security of the United
States? That's the that's the central
line that's put forward by the Trump
administration.
>> No, I don't think um No, they don't have
electricity. They don't have power. what
what what threat can a country that's on
the verge of collapse be to the US and
also I mean yes there relations with
China with Russia but certainly those
are not new and they've had those
relations at times where it was much
more dangerous for those relations to
exist so I don't think there's any
particular threat now though of course I
don't have access to all the information
they do but I can't imagine it would be
a particular threat now that would
justify the level of hardship ship being
imposed on the Cuban people. And let me
just add categorically that the oil
embargo is is cruel and and unjust. It's
it's collective punishment. It's killing
people that, you know, hospitals can't
run incubators or dialysis machines.
There's no fuel for ambulances to get to
hospitals. I mean, it's just it's a it's
a it's a humanitarian disaster that's
very likely to get a lot worse very
quickly. I read the letter that you put
in the New York Times. It's an open
letter to the president of Cuba,
reminiscent of the ones that you saw
your father write to Fidel Castro, where
you point out where he also shoulders
the blame for the situation in Cuba.
>> Yeah. Because the way the Cuban
government responds to all this is just
and and it it's the way they've
responded to the US for for more than 60
years, which is to say that the troubles
in Cuba, the hardships in Cuba are all
the fault of the US and the US embargo.
Now, the US embargo is terrible. I don't
support it as policy. So, what they're
saying is partly true, but it doesn't
explain everything in Cuba. It doesn't
explain the levels of repression. and it
doesn't explain terrible economic
decisions that have been made over the
last decades and especially over the
last two decades. So I think it's just
insufficient and in order for something
to change peacefully in Cuba, which is
what I most want, right? I want life to
get better for for for the Cuban people.
So in order for something to change in
Cuba and to change peacefully, I think
they need to kind of move beyond that
really tired line. They need to say,
"Okay, things are horrible." Yes, the US
embargo was terrible, but what can we do
and what do our people want? The thing I
called for at the end of the letter was
a national dialogue. And even that, the
Cuban government can't talk about a
national dialogue without bringing in
the US as an impediment. There is one
person in the administration who knows
the story of Cuba in the way you do and
that's Marco Rubio who grew up hearing
stories of Cuba from his grandfather. He
was um filled with a sense of the
country that his family left behind. He
would understand your story perfectly,
wouldn't he? Even if politically his
instincts are different from yours.
>> Yeah. I mean, I think there's something
we share, which is having grown up with
that sense of pain and loss and
nostalgia, but I do think our stories
are different in that I went to Cuba.
I've been going to Cuba since 1990. I
don't go to Cuba as an act of political
solidarity with the Cuban government.
That's never ever been the purpose of my
my trip. I go to do historical research
and to produce history books about Cuba.
I go to see my family. And that means
that not to insult him or anything, but
it means that I have an understanding of
or more certainly more of an
understanding I think than he does of
what it is like to be there and what it
is like to talk to people, ordinary
people who live there. And sometimes in
Miami, people think and talk about Cuba
in a way that demonizes people there,
that imagines that, you know, and I've
heard this kind of language, that
communism destroys everything. And they
don't think about the way life goes on,
the way that people make their lives,
the way that people have just ordinary
human needs for connection. And I think
that's what's missing.
in in his perspective that there isn't
that firsthand experience of the place.
He knows the Cuba that his parents and
grandparents talked about and he knows
the Cuba that he's learned about through
his research as a senator and then as a
as a as Secretary of State, but I don't
think he has experience on the ground
that would lead him maybe to be more
flexible
and more realistic. Can you deconstruct
something for us which is the the
revolution itself? Your book Cuba and
American history goes back much earlier
than that to the ways that the US I mean
there was a slogan wasn't there by Cuba
which existed way back in the in the
19th century. But the revolution that
brought Castro to power a few years
before your parents left Cuba, was it a
communist revolution at the beginning?
No, it became a communist revolution,
but it was not in the beginning. In the
years leading up to 1959 and Castro's
victory, it was a movement meant to oust
the dictator Fuhi Batista. It was a
movement to restore the 1940
constitution, which Batista's coup had
nullified. It was a movement against
corruption in government. It was all
those things. In Castro's public
speaking and public pronouncements on
the revolution before he came to power,
he talked about things like land reform,
giving land to landless peasants,
increasing opportunities for education,
things like that. But those things were
a part of progressive political
discourse in Cuba for decades
>> and in many parts of the world at that
time as the age of colonialism and
empire comes to an end.
>> Right. Yes. There was never any mention
of a socialist organization of the
economy. There was not even anything
publicly that would suggest a major
break with the United States. So all
that developed in the first years of
revolution and it was a you know I think
a fascinating dynamic in which the
revolutionary government would do
something and then the US would respond
and with each encounter of US and Cuban
policy the stakes got higher and higher.
>> You had the Bay of Pigs in April 1961
and it was in it was on the eve of that
that Castro first announced the
revolution was socialist. I'm struck by
the intensity of time. Castro comes to
power in 1959 and within three years
Cuba is a front line in the cold war
where the standoff over the Cuban
missile crisis between Kennedy and
Krushchev makes the world confront the
possibility of nuclear war.
>> Yeah. And it was a real possibility. I
think you know it's been so long since
it happened that people forget that
sometimes that the world did almost come
to the brink of Armageddon. I think the
idea of int intense time is fantastic. I
think that's what it was lived like at
the time. And when you read things from
1959, people at the time were even
saying that, you know, we we've wasted a
lot of time. We have to accelerate time.
We have to get a lot done. There was a
sense of euphoria in the beginning. I
mean, historians sometimes call it
revolutionary time. Something that kind
of a very intense kind of sped up time.
And I think that describes it perfectly.
I want to again bring us back to the
present and two things. One about the
recent arrivals from Cuba and how they
are finding themselves targeted by the
administration's drive to deport. What
is the impact of that? How much do you
think it could change Republican
politics in a place like Florida? Well,
this administration's policy regarding
immigration, I think, has been cruel and
unjust, and Cubans are not accepted from
that. A lot of Cubans in Miami and South
Florida voted for Trump, understanding
that his intention was to deport people.
They never thought those deportations
would apply to Cubans. They thought it
would apply to other people because
Cubans have always had an advantage in
the US. There's something, you know,
passed by Lynden Johnson's
administration, the Cuban Adjustment
Act, which basically gave Cubans a
welcome no other immigrants had. It gave
them a fast track to residency and then
to citizenship. That is still the law of
the land. So, Cubans assumed that
whatever happened generally with
deportation would not apply to them
because of the Cuban Adjustment Act. But
in practice, the Cuban Adjustment Act is
not being observed. So, Cubans are being
detained. They show up for regular
immigration check-ins and they're being
detained. They show up for asylum
hearings and judges dismiss their cases,
which means that they're eligible for
deportation. I think it will change it
may change CubanAmerican attitudes
towards Trump. It made him definitely
less popular. People I talked to in
Miami see it. You hear it. I know it
from relatives who are who are
Republicans who voted for him who are
very unhappy with the immigration
policies. So, I do think it has a
potential to make a real impact in
voting practices. The question is what
will happen in Cuba? Because if if
something were to change in Cuba and the
communist government were to fall and if
people in Miami attribute that to to
Trump's policy, then that might erase
some of the fall in popularity.
You saw, didn't you, that moment of hope
of a reset in relations when President
Obama visited Cuba and it looked like
the US was into a new era?
What are you looking for now that does
give you hope amidst all this?
>> It's a combination of hope and and and
fear at the same time. I feel like I
can't separate them. The fact that
things have gotten so bad means that
there is maybe more opportunity for
change right now.
But at the same time, the reason that
exists is because things are absolutely,
you know, unsustainable in Cuba, which
never makes me feel good. I hope that
both sides can figure out a way to
negotiate
and arrive at a place
that makes room for Cuban people to live
more fully. Right now, it it doesn't
feel like they're living. It feels like
they're barely hanging on. They're
barely surviving. And even survival
right now is an open question. So if if
there's a way
that they can arrive at a peaceful
change
that would be great but you know again I
don't know how hopeful I am that that
will happen and I do fear you know all
kinds of things
>> and is that the case especially because
you know the history you know how over
generations over two centuries
the question of how Cuba should or will
relate to the United States has been so
complicated.
The US has wanted Cuba in one way or
another for so long,
>> right? And US intervention in Cuba has
never ended well and it has produced
conditions and resentments that then
feed other movements. So I think I'm
just hoping that people in the
administration aren't thinking that this
will kind of be an easy win and then
it's over, right? Because for one thing,
it won't be over. The story continues.
Even when people talk about Cuba
collapsing, what does that what does
that mean? Trump will say Cuba will
collapse any minute. But when something
collapses, whatever that is, it still
continues to exist. And the collapse
continues to unfold and get worse and
and worse perhaps, right? And that's the
other thing I'm worried about because as
a scholar of Cuban history, I know that
when there have been political
transitions, when unpopular governments
have been deposed, there has often been
violence. And I do worry about that,
about reprisals and retribution that may
bring really consequences.
>> So there are these two countries that
are part of your life, Cuba and the
United States. I want to close by
talking about you and your life now and
how you how those two countries coexist
in your life because it's clear from
reading this book that your daughters
have inherited this attachment to Cuba.
Like the way that your mother passed it
on to you, you've given it to your
daughters,
>> right?
>> Unintentionally. Intentionally, I don't
know.
>> No, not really. It wasn't intentional. I
mean, you know, they grew up seeing my
mother. They grew up knowing that I
worked on Cuban history. I would go to
Cuba to do research and sometimes I
would take them with me. You know, my
older daughter played hideand-seek one
summer in the provincial archive in the
city of San Fuego, right? So, it's
always been a part of their life, but
I'm surprised actually at at how much
they're interested in it. So, um, and
I'm pleased by it. I don't think it's an
obsession with them quite in the same
way it was with me. I don't think
they'll make it their life's work. I
think but but they are they do feel an
emotional attachment to it that I think
you know I put there unintentionally but
also that my parents did.
>> And did it take you a while to
call yourself American? Yes. I think you
grew up thinking of yourself as Cuban.
Like how does that transition happen?
cuz I think you grew up in a very Cuban
community and college at Vasis is a key
moment of you discovering a wider world,
>> right? Yeah. No, everyone I grew up with
thought of themselves as Cuban and
sometimes I'll call myself
CubanAmerican,
but yeah. No, I think it's it wasn't I
think until I had children of my own and
began traveling with them outside the US
that I began to think of myself as
American. In the last line of the book,
I I call myself uh an American woman.
And that's the first time I've ever
written it so explicitly like that.
>> Your father, when he's dying, you thank
him, don't you, for bringing you to the
United States. It was his departure that
made yours possible. But I I felt like
you hadn't really seen that as a moment
to spark gratitude until you're there in
his last hours and days.
>> Yeah. It just felt I wanted to say that
to him before he died. Um
because I realized that my coming here
or their bringing me here meant that,
you know, that I had opportunities I
would have never had had I stayed in
Cuba. And also there's the idea that
even if I had stayed in Cuba, maybe I
would have left later. Maybe I'd be part
of this major exodus over the last years
that ended up coming into the US at the
US Mexico border, right? Who knows what
would have happened? I owe everything to
them. And so I just wanted to tell him
that before before he died. And and and
it's also curious that, you know, in
some sense it's there having brought me
here is partly what allowed for my
re-encounter or embrace with Cuba
itself. If I had stayed in Cuba, I might
not be that interested in Cuba.
>> Yeah, it's true. You've had that
distance and and that connection. Do you
think that they would have struggled
with your book if they were still alive
to read it? That they would have found
it too personal or too raw? I could have
never written it if they were alive.
Um, actually, I'm not sure that's true.
I could have never written the book if
my brother was alive. Um,
I struggle with that question a lot now
that it's coming out,
>> right? What they would think if they
were to read it. Of course, they
couldn't read it unless it was in
Spanish. So, hopefully it'll be in
Spanish someday. I think that they would
understand that the book is a testament
of love for them, a testament of love
for this place called Cuba. So, I think
they would understand that. Would they
be pleased with every detail I shared?
Maybe not. But my sister tells me that
my mother would love the fact that she's
on the cover of a book. [laughter]
Yeah, it's a it's a gorgeous picture.
She's smiling. She's holding you in her
arms. Her older son Polly is right there
beside her. Ada Ferrer, thank you. Thank
you for enlightening me along with so
many others.
>> No. Well, thanks for having me and
thanks for reading the book.